Add dag blog post (#147)
n0-computer/iroh.computer: src/app/blog/iroh-dag-sync/page.mdx

But beyond that, there is a very large variety of possible traversals. You might want to traverse the DAG in different orders, e.g. `depth-first, pre-order, left to right`. You might want to limit the traversal to a certain DAG depth, or filter out leaves (CIDs with format raw).

But it gets more complex than this. You might want to look into the actual DAG data itself. E.g. only follow DAG-CBOR links that have a path `/prev`, and not ones that have a path `/data` to follow just the stem of a linked list like DAG.

Or even more complex, only follow links in blocks where some sort of checksum or signature checks out.

You could try to design a generic language to specify (deterministic) DAG traversals. A protocol that takes this approach is [graphsync](https://ipld.io/specs/transport/graphsync/). But especially for some of the more complex use cases mentioned above you would end up having to define a turing complete language.

> So I have decided to just implement a number of useful traversals of varying level of complexity, but allow implementing additonal deterministic traversals in rust. Of course this means that sync will have to be tailored to the needs of the application, and different applications will have different ALPNs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So I have decided to just implement a number of useful traversals of varying level of complexity, but allow implementing additional deterministic traversals in rust. Of course this means that sync will have to be tailored to the needs of the application, and different applications will have different ALPNs
```

data.

We offer BLAKE3 hashed blobs of arbitrary size, with a very rich set of
capabilities including verified range requests, verified streaming and size
proofs.

In addition, we offer a single container type, a sequence of BLAKE3 hashes.

Using these two primitives, we provide specialized collections of data. A common
pattern is to use a hash sequence, with the first child being a blob of
self-describing metadata.

These primitives are sufficiently versatile to handle many use cases, such
as file system sync in [sendme](https://iroh.computer/sendme).

Focusing on BLAKE3 and the various capabilities that BLAKE3 makes possible is
the right choice for iroh. But that does not change the fact that sometimes
you have different needs.

You might want to use different hash functions, for example because you have
a need for a hash function like [poseidon](https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/458.pdf)
that is more suitable to use in zero knowledge proofs. Or you have existing
data that is hashed with the ubiquitous SHA-2 hash.

Also, you might have data that naturally forms a DAG, such as a git commit
history, unixfs data, event logs, or even blockchains.

> Iroh-bytes does not completely solve these use cases, but it provides a very
> useful building block of a possible solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`iroh-blobs` does not completely solve these use cases, but it provides a very
useful building block for a possible solution.
```

I think you are referencing the crate here, correct?

Author: Gah, yes. I keep using the old name.

This is nothing. It took me way to long to figure out why `RUST_LOG=iroh_bytes=debug` did not do anything...

## Local storage

> Since the default iroh blobs store does not contain information about the 
> dag structure. So we need an additional persistent store for this information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default `iroh-blobs` store does not contain information about the 
dag structure. So, we need an additional persistent store for this information:
```

> - a table that maps a generic IPLD hash (hash format and digest) to A
> BLAKE3 hash. (We must only ever populate this table if we have verified
> that the IPLD hash corresponds to the BLAKE3 hash. We must not trust external
> sources for this mapping!)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- a table that maps a generic IPLD hash (hash format and digest) to a
BLAKE3 hash. (We must only ever populate this table if we have verified
that the IPLD hash corresponds to the BLAKE3 hash. We must not trust external
sources for this mapping!)
```

> In addition, since extracting links out of IPLD data blocks can be somewhat
> expensive, we have an additional table to cache this step:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, since extracting links out of IPLD data blocks can be somewhat
expensive, we have an additional table to cache this step:
```

> - a table that contains the IPLD links for a (ipld format, blake3 hash) tuple.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- a table that contains the IPLD links for a `(ipld_format, blake3_hash)` tuple.
```

Just to make it clear you aren't using a parenthesis for grammar, but as a way to illustrate the tuple.

Using these two tables, we can cheaply traverse the dag from a given root cid to
answer questions of liveness. To look up the links for a cid, you first look up
the corresponding BLAKE3 hash for the hash format and digest, then look up the
links by IPLD format and BLAKE3 hash.

> As we will see, such traversals will also play A key role in the sync protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we will see, such traversals will also play a key role in the sync protocol.
```

## Sync protocol

When syncing dags, especially deep dags such as the ones formed by event
sourcing systems like [actyx], commit histories, or blockchains, it is essential
to minimize the number of roundtrips. A naive protocol might do the dag
traversal by just asking for blobs level by level. Such a scheme could use the

> existing iroh-blobs protocol, but it would lead to a very large number of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
existing `iroh-blobs` protocol, but it would lead to a very large number of
```

> roundtrips for deep dags. While for some shallow tree like dags this would not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
roundtrips for deep dags. While for some shallow, tree-like dags this would not
```

be a big deal, for deep dags we would never be able to saturate a link when
syncing.

So we need a custom protocol that understands dags. Luckily it is very easy to
define custom protocols in iroh, either by building a custom iroh node using

> iroh-net, or by using the [new (as of 0.19)](BLOG POST LINK) feature of custom

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`iroh-net`, or by using the [new (as of 0.19)](https://iroh.computer/blog/iroh-0-19-make-it-your-own) feature of custom
```

Let's use the linux kernel sources as an example.

```
> ipfs add ../linux --raw-leaves
> ipfs dag export QmWyLtd4WEJe45UBqCZG94gYY9B8qF3k4DKFX3o2bodHmV > linux.car
```
## Import the data

```
> cargo run --release import linux.car
...
root: QmWyLtd4WEJe45UBqCZG94gYY9B8qF3k4DKFX3o2bodHmV
```

This will create two databases in the current directory. dag.db contains
information about the structure of the dag, blobs.db (a directory) contains
the raw data.

- Start a node that makes the data available

```
> cargo run --release node
I am irgkesdtbih664hq2fjgd6zf7g6mazqkr7deqzplavmwl3vdbboa
```

## Sync with the default traversal

In a *different directory*, start the sync process:

```
> mkdir tmp
> cd tmp
> cargo run --release sync --from irgkesdtbih664hq2fjgd6zf7g6mazqkr7deqzplavmwl3vdbboa QmWyLtd4WEJe45UBqCZG94gYY9B8qF3k4DKFX3o2bodHmV
```

This will traverse the entire DAG in depth-first, pre-order, left-to-right
traversal order. Which may take a while. But - it is just a single request/
response pair, so we will saturate the wire.

## Export the synced data (optional)

```
> cargo run --release export QmWyLtd4WEJe45UBqCZG94gYY9B8qF3k4DKFX3o2bodHmV --target output.car
```

> Export without specifying a target just dumps the cids to stdout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: exporting without specifying a target just dumps the cids to stdout.
```

## Advanced use

> The above example sync a large dag using a single request/response interaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above example syncs a large dag using a single request/response interaction.
```

It uses the default strategy of traversing the dag in depth first, preorder,
left to right, which does the job if you want to sync the entire dag.

But what if you want to do a partial sync? You can specify more complex
configurations for the existing defined traversals.

### Exclude leaf nodes

```
cargo run --release sync --from bsmlrj4sodhaivs2r7tssw4zeasqqr42lk6xt4e42ikzazkp4huq \
  --traversal 'Full(root:"QmWyLtd4WEJe45UBqCZG94gYY9B8qF3k4DKFX3o2bodHmV",filter:NoRaw)'
```

> Here we specify the traversal to use as a [ron] expression, specifying a full

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we specify the traversal to use as a [RON](https://github.com/ron-rs/ron) expression, specifying a full
```

traversal where we filter out cids that have format raw and are guaranteed to be
leaf nodes of the dag.

In case of unixfs data, the vast majority of the bytes of the dag are in the leaf
nodes, so requesting only non-leaf nodes gives us the ability to inspect the
directory structure while saving a lot of bandwidth.

We could also, in a second step, request all leaves from multiple senders.

### Full traversal, but exclude data for leaf nodes.

```
cargo run --release sync --from bsmlrj4sodhaivs2r7tssw4zeasqqr42lk6xt4e42ikzazkp4huq \
  --traversal 'Full(root:"QmWyLtd4WEJe45UBqCZG94gYY9B8qF3k4DKFX3o2bodHmV")' --inline NoRaw
```

In this case we do a full traversal, but only *inline data* for non-raw blocks that

> can possibly contain links.

Reviewer: Can you add another line or two describing the difference between this mode and the one from the previous section?

Is it that in the previous mode, we don't even send over the CIDs for the raw nodes, but in this mode we DO send over the CIDs for the raw nodes, but just don't fetch the data corresponding to those raw format CIDs?

In other words, we get all the CIDs for the DAG, but only the data for the non-raw CIDs. In the previous section we only get the CIDs for the non-raw CIDs?

Author: Yes, exactly. The idea is that you have the cid to blake3 mapping and can then try to get the data via blake3 hash from somewhere else (you can not trust the mapping though until you have downloaded and validated with the non blake3 hash!)
